For questions.
We always like that too. I'll give you a call with, uh,
two minutes to go and, um,
your time way you go and your time.
All right. Wonderful. I have, um,
slightly corrected some things, but it's more
or less the same as written, so I'll just read it verbatim
then, then hopefully I'll be done on time.
Uh, okay. Um, your honors,
I fully object to this proposed change
of the legislation on the basis
that the entire change has been established on falsehoods
about the performance and accountability
of welcoming transport in its role
as the road control authority for ko.
Despite at meeting the overwhelming majority
of the performance initiatives in Mayor Brown's, letters
of expectation to date
and at undergoing a series of restructures.
As a result, mayor Brown still concluded that at was out
of control, and that is a quote
at has always been A CCO accountable to Auckland Council
and strategic documents like the Study Center master plan
and others at,
has always been guided in its design standards
and safety initiatives by NZT ahi.
What exactly has at done in the realm of urban planning
that has not been guided by either
of these two organizations
or through extensive public engagement?
Answers to this question have never been brought
to bear revealing that this proposal is clearly a political
agenda with no basis in making transport in Auckland better.
And it's coming at a multimillion dollar cost
to taxpayers in the form
of huge amounts of administrative work.
It will be eighties third restructuring in just a few short
years, and it's causing a massive degradation
of morale within the organization.
So people within at are being floored to continue on
as if their careers are not under threat.
This is all exacerbated by the fact that the decision
to revoke ATS RC authority
through legislative change was pushed through
before there were any actual solid ideas about
what would take its place
or how the priority would actually, um, sorry.
How the entity would actually improve things
for Auckland is dozens of staff across both AT
and AC are having to fill in the gaps, the con roles
specific to making sure this isn't a disaster.
Meanwhile, nobody has actually articulated in any meaningful
way why the very improvements touted under this bill could
not have been achieved with a much less destructive internal
governance initiated, um,
or sorry, initiative in collaboration with Auckland Council.
Even merging parts of eighties operations back into Auckland
Council could be achieved without this change.
The multimillion dollar question that needs
to be answered is why,
why is this legislative change needed at all?
There was a reason at was established in first place,
and it has a lot to do with the problems
of having decision making authority distributed widely
across the many local wards,
at least inconsistencies across the network,
which inevitably exacerbates problems with congestion
and could even lead to serious safety issues, particularly
as there are disagreements between experienced engineers,
urban planners, and elected politicians.
There is a significant amount of utility.
Having the public transport authority in Auckland also be
the road control authority.
It makes it easy to integrate public transport
services into local networks.
In other words, to have a unified all network approach,
which encompasses all the different competing demands, such
as active modes, general traffic, buses, trains,
and how they can all be
accommodated within the road reserve.
David, we've got two minutes left, so,
Okay. It will almost certainly
be the case
that making important planning decisions will become more
rather than less efficient under this new RCA body.
Um, I will abbreviate a little bit.
Um, Auckland Transport has already committed to engaging
with, in most cases and in most cases,
honoring the decisions of local boards
with the A two A initiative,
but it also has to be recognized.
There comes a point in transportation design when technical
and engineering decisions that are not a matter
of public opinion, uh, sorry,
are not a matter of public opinion.
We proceed down this road at our peril
and future generations will suffer the
consequences and the costs.
I think it'll take a very long time for things to recover.
So my recommendation really is
that we cancel the proposed legislative change
and scale back the urgency of these changes,
acknowledge the mistake
and the huge waste of taxpayer funded human resources
required, um,
and that this whole thing was launched on false pretenses
by Mayor Brown and former Minister
of Transport, Samian Brown.
So I think we should proceed instead, recognizing
that we can make these changes, you know, with,
with things in situ
and that that really should be the way forward.
Um, there is a bit more context in my, um, submission,
so I invite you guys to read it
and if there's any questions, I'm happy
to ask them now in the last minute.
Thank you, David. Uh, first question's from, uh,
we've only got time for about one probably. So Dan,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, David, for your submission.
I'm just wondering if you're aware of the proportion
of Auckland, does it have confidence in the current
Auckland transport?
Are you aware of the proportion?
Um, I, I'm not aware of the exact proportion,
but I of course understand that there's quite a lot
of negative sentiment towards at,
and I I think that, um, a big part of that comes as a result
of really a collective responsibility
among the council group to really, um, not, um,
take accountability where accountability is due.
Um, such as things like the city center master plan.
There's, there's many cases where Mayor Brown has complained
about works and designs in the city center, for example,
which have all been, um, initiatives
by Auckland Council and Auckland Transport.
Thank, and that's never really been articulated.
Thank you. I should just clarify, it's 29%, so
the current structure's definitely.
Thanks, Dan. Not working,
and this bill is aimed to fix those issues. Thank you.
The issue I'll, sorry.
The issue I'll just say very quickly is that
it's not been articulated
how the bill will actually solve the problem
and increase confidence. Okay. Sorry.
No, that's fair enough. Look, David, thank you.
We really appreciate your, um, your input as, as always.
Thank You. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Okay,
and then we have, uh, our second, um, Smit.
So we've got Justin National Road Carrier Association.
Justin, are you there? We,
well, it's noisy, isn't it?
I'm gonna buy you a new one for Christmas. Yes,
It's, it's parliaments first.
Justin, look, welcome. Good to see you. Um, good
Afternoon. We've
got your submission, which you can take as read.
Uh, great. We've got you down for
10 minutes as an organization.
I'll give you a call with about four
to go if you wanna leave some time for questions
and, uh, you know, so if you just wanna highlight the key
points and then, um, and then we'll go some questions.
That'll be great. Your time. Yeah, that's
Great. Thank
you very much. And thank you for the committee, um,
taking the time to, um, hear me today.
Um, now un unhelpfully, my notes have just, uh,
disappeared from me.
Uh, unfortunately, sorry, here we go.
Yes, more technology joys.
Um, look, I was, I was briefly in front
of the committee recently at the Port of Auckland as well,
so I won't go into detail introducing myself.
Thank you. And NRC. Um, so look, we, we support the bill.
We agree with the government's position
that Auckland Transport System needs to improve
to support national economic goals.
Um, Auckland's Auckland's unique, um, and its size
and importance to New Zealand overall
and unique also in the role it plays
in the freight and supply chain.
You've got two of the key gateways to New Zealand here
with Port of Auckland and Auckland International Airport,
and also of course serves as a critical connector
between north and central North Island.
So how Auckland, um, manages its transport network is
of critical importance, um, for the national economy
and for the supply chain as well.
So we, we support detail in the, um, bill,
but we, there are some points of concerns particularly
around in terms of striking that balance between, um,
local board central governance, um, and,
and council, which I'd like to raise, uh,
national Road carriers is well placed
to give a view on the need for this change.
We've worked very closely with Auckland Transport,
um, over the years.
Uh, I'm on the freight reference group at Auckland
Transport, and we also support the freight working group,
and it's my experience through this
that the existing governance structure is
below the standard needed, um, for such a critical, um,
entity to the New Zealand economy
in a number of important areas.
Um, it's not something I say lightly.
Um, my own background is in managing large capital projects
and portfolios for infrastructure companies.
So I'm well placed to sort of understand the shortcomings,
um, in terms of how competing demands
of projects across the transport networks are managed.
Uh, and I think the, the
as points were raised in our submission,
the existing structure limits accountability
by senior leadership is one of the core areas.
So there's no individual executive member tasks
with oversight of individual networks.
Auckland transports managing five networks, um,
but there's multiple people accountable
for each individual network, which is a recipe
for, um, for disaster.
Um, and it means that they're not maximizing transport
outcomes across the five networks as an entirety.
So one network may be improved,
but it can often come at the detriment of another, um,
capital planning and project delivery processes.
So the structure required to be in place
for portfolio management and project management
and governance do not appear
to be anywhere near adequate for such a complex.
Um, you, you know, they're managing 2000 projects across
these networks at any one time.
Um, and I can see, um, from the results
that they're not managing those trade offs
and interdependencies appropriately.
So all of these issues will need to be addressed
by the replacement government structure
that Auckland Council, um, puts in place.
We support the structure of governance
and in terms of the balance of power
between Wellington Auckland Council, so central government,
Auckland Council and local boards, um, I think the, the, uh,
trying to keep the, the transport function
as democratically accountable
as well is very important given the, the impact
that transport has on everyone's lives.
Um, but what I would say is that, um, and,
and so within that local boards, I think at the,
the local road and connector road level, um,
that's appropriate for how local boards, um,
have the ability to manage those.
Um, but what needs to not be lost sight of is the fact
that you're dealing with a network as well.
So some of those roads will find themselves making up an
actual network across Auckland.
So as an example, Auckland runs a strategic freight network.
It's about the only RCA in the country, I think that has a,
has a defined strategic freight network, which is, um,
which is excellent, that runs across some connector roads.
I'm sure I'm not so sure about local roads.
It shouldn't be running across local roads in general,
but what that means is if there's any decisions to be made,
um, on a connector road that's part of a wider network, um,
the impacts to the wider network need to be taken account
as well as the local, local desires.
And I think that's, the governance will need
to strike the balance there.
Um, and I think it's also, uh,
about striking the balance in terms of
what approvals are needed out of the minister as well.
So there's a real art in getting that right.
You want, um, you want the large nationally significant
and material projects above a particular spend to be, um,
to perhaps have ministerial input,
but you don't want to have sand in the gears in terms of,
um, smaller decisions being made.
So as, as an example,
strategic freight networks currently going
through a review at Auckland, it might see that some
of the local roads, or I show, I should say connector roads,
um, uh, now become part of the strategic freight network.
It's not clear on the current reading of the bill,
but it appears that in order for that to happen,
it would require ministerial sign off.
Now I would say that's just that this a layer of complexity
and lack of flexibility beyond what the bill's intending.
And I think, um, I think the drafters just need
to look closely at that to see, um, you know, when,
when the minister's involvement,
I'm sure the minister wouldn't appreciate having
to get involved at that level of minutiae either.
Um, so the,
I think they're the, they're the key points that I wish
to raise, um, in terms of our submission.
So now I'll pause for questions.
Your timing is very good, four
and a half minutes left, so I didn't quite get to
that four minutes, uh, um, time, so, great.
Um, colleagues, any questions? Justin? No good submissions.
Great one. Um, look, can I just ask one, uh, Justin,
and it's that, um, that issue of the, the, um,
the governing body and the local boards
and I mean, I think effectively we've been asked
by the council to be a bit more flexible to allow them
to make up their mind as to how, how they do that.
Got an observation on that
because I think they see it as potentially quite clunky and,
and cumbersome, especially if it's legislated.
Yeah, I, I, I think what you need to do, and,
and I'm not sure it can be achieved within legislation,
but you need to set out the principles in terms
of whi which decision sets can rest
with local boards comfortably,
and then which ones need to go out to council.
So as an example, I think we've seen,
we've all seen the examples of local roads, um, wanting
to have street furniture put in
or, um, largely be pedestrianized or closed off.
Um, one of the caveats around that would need to be that,
um, supply chain trucks can get in there.
So furniture removal vehicles, for example,
even if it's just a residential street and also fire
and emergency heavy vehicles
need to be able to get in there.
Um, so it's, so you have to get into a certain amount
of detail that doesn't sit comfortably in legislation,
but would need to be resolved, um,
within council governance.
Yeah, no, that's helpful. Thank you. Um, Simon,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, good afternoon, Justin.
Afternoon, Simon. Hello.
Sorry, I, I've good, I've lost visual.
Sorry, Simon, so I'm imagining you well,
Well, thank you.
Um, so just following on from that, uh, I've heard that the,
um, the heavy hall roots
around Auckland are becoming increasing increasingly
obstructed with, uh, raised crossings, raised tables, uh,
and all kinds of street furniture.
Uh, do you have a view on keeping those arterials clear
of all of these obstructions, which seem
to be popping up willy-nilly?
Yeah, ab, absolutely.
So that's the purpose of the strategic freight network.
Um, and that should be identifying all
of those critical routes, heavy haul
and over dimensional was,
its its own special network coming off the port.
There's only certain roads that can,
can tolerate the weights and things.
Um, so the way to do it is you need, it's back to
that accountability that I was talking about.
So there needs to be an executive
or an individual in charge
of the strategic freight network itself
and responsible for defending that
and making sure that the outcomes, um,
from other networks don't come at the detriment
of strategic freight network.
So you, you that they're the place
where you tree up those sorts of decisions around whether,
whether things are trying to happen in the corridors that,
that are part of the strategic freight network
and they can be decided there.
Great. Thank you. Okay.
Um, Justin, look, thank you very much for that.
Um, we've got do have a another minute and a bit left.
So we'll ask one other question, which is,
you talked about the, the performance, uh,
the existing governance structure as below stand.
Is that what you're saying is that there is simply nobody in
structural terms, there is nobody responsible for key
decisions that's spread across a range of people, um,
and nobody gets accountability or being in charge of it?
Yep. That, that's right.
It's, it's, it's back
to just having individual executives appointed
and responsible for a network
that they are ultimately responsible for.
At the moment, I think it's shared across a number
of individuals for each network is
how it appears to be to me.
And that's how compromises get made.
I think just because you're moving the governance into
Auckland Council doesn't necessarily solve that problem.
I was gonna ask that. Yeah,
so this really is the opportunity you have
to get in a governance, um, expert to design it well,
the trade-offs between Wellington Central
and local government being very clear on what you're trying
to achieve and what mechanisms will help that be achieved.
And that's what I've been talking to AC in terms
of encouraging them to do that.
Okay. No, that, that's very helpful. Thank you Justin.
Really appreciate it. Good to see you
Again. Great. Thank
you very much Mr. Thanks Justin. Thank you.
Cheers mate. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Alright, let's.